Server 10.12 Release Notes (#4804)
owncloud/docs: modules/ROOT/pages/server_release_notes.adoc

=== Migrations

When upgrading from ownCloud Server 10.11.0, the following migrations will run as part of the upgrade procedure:

* A migration step takes care of setting the length of the "oc_calendars.components" column to 255 (see below). This step is expected to be quick and should not impact upgrade duration significantly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40563[#40563]
* An index is going to be added on the oc_filecache table which should help to speed-up bulk file operations. Please be aware that this migration step may take several hours in case of installations where the oc_filecache table contains a significantly large number of entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40633[#40633]

=== Drop PHP 7.3 support across the platform

Support for security fixes for PHP 7.3 ended in December 2021. ownCloud Server no longer supports PHP 7.3 therefore ensure that you are using PHP 7.4. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40394[#40394]

NOTE: Before upgrading to ownCloud Server 10.12, you MUST upgrade to PHP 7.4. ownCloud Server 10.12 will not start when using PHP 7.3.

=== Persistent major file versions workflow

> Restore operation logic changed. Now restore creates a new current version of the file from one of past the noncurrent versions of the file. The current version also receives incremented mtime for the file, and author of the file is the user who restored it. The old noncurrent version is no longer removed upon restore and the current version no longer receives mtime of that version. The current version of the file is now shown in the Versions Tab, highlighted with "gray" background. Versions now persist additional extended metadata on versioning tags, that allow easier identification of the versions. Each update increases the minor version for the file. The current version of the file now can be published, which increases the major version tag. Each new edit of the file creates noncurrent versions - the ones tagged with major version due to publishing will persist long term and won't be subject to any retention policies. Migrate from deprecated save_version_author to save_version_metadata. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40531[#40531]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restore operation logic changed. Now restore creates a new current version of the file from one of the past noncurrent versions of the file. The current version also receives incremented mtime for the file, and author of the file is the user who restored it. The old noncurrent version is no longer removed upon restore and the current version no longer receives mtime of that version. The current version of the file is now shown in the Versions Tab, highlighted with "gray" background. Versions now persist additional extended metadata on versioning tags, that allow easier identification of the versions. Each update increases the minor version for the file. The current version of the file now can be published, which increases the major version tag. Each new edit of the file creates noncurrent versions - the ones tagged with major version due to publishing will persist long term and won't be subject to any retention policies. Migrate from deprecated save_version_author to save_version_metadata. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40531[#40531]
```

=== Skip public links when updating permissions of share's children

Updates to permissions of a share were wrongly propagated to public links children. This has now been fixed and public links are being skipped. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40420[#40420]

=== Store checksums only if the whole stream has been read

Previously, range downloads (or downloads requesting a specific byte range) would store a checksum, if needed, based only on the requested range. This caused problems because the checksum is expected to be for the whole file. Now those range downloads won't store a checksum because only a part of the file has been read, so the checksum would be incomplete. Some additional cases have been taken into account, mostly based on actions that could happen on the data stream, but they shouldn't happen normally. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40513[#40513]

=== Fix the dav:cleanup-chunks command to work with a configured folder

> The ownCloud's FS was initialized partially to prevent contacting the LDAP server if it was configured. This was causing problems because the upload folder where the chunks were expected was a mountpoint, and due to the partial FS initialization such mountpoint was missing, so we were checking a different folder (the default one). Now, the ownCloud's FS will be fully initialized instead, so the mountpoint will be present and we check the right location. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40571[#40571]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ownCloud's file system was initialized partially to prevent contacting the LDAP server if it was configured. This was causing problems because the upload folder where the chunks were expected was a mount point, and due to the partial file system initialization such a mount point was missing, so we were checking a different folder (the default one). Now, ownCloud's file system will be fully initialized instead, so that the mount point will be present and we check the right location. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40571[#40571]
```

=== Copy the encryption keys first and then rename the files

> Having encryption enabled, when a file was renamed, first the actual file was renamed, and then the encryption keys were moved to the new location. If something went wrong, it was possible that the keys weren't moved. This caused the file to become inaccessible because we couldn't decrypt the file due to the missing keys (which weren't in the right place). Now, when a file is renamed, the encryption keys will be copied first, and then the file will be renamed. If the encryption keys fail to be copied, the rename will fail. After the encryption keys are copied, the file could fail to be renamed. In this case, the copied keys will be removed, but the file will still be accessible because we still keep the old keys. The original keys (not the copy) will be removed if the file is renamed successfully. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40433[#40433]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With encryption enabled when a file was renamed, first the actual file was renamed, and then the encryption keys were moved to the new location. If something went wrong, it was possible that the keys weren't moved. This caused the file to become inaccessible because we couldn't decrypt the file due to the missing keys (which weren't in the right place). Now, when a file is renamed, the encryption keys will be copied first, and then the file will be renamed. If the encryption keys fail to be copied, the rename will fail. After the encryption keys are copied, the file could fail to be renamed. In this case, the copied keys will be removed, but the file will still be accessible because we still keep the old keys. The original keys (not the copy) will be removed if the file is successfully renamed successfully. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40433[#40433]
```

> With encryption enabled when a file was renamed, first the actual file was renamed, and then the encryption keys were moved to the new location. If something went wrong, it was possible that the keys weren't moved. This caused the file to become inaccessible because we couldn't decrypt the file due to the missing keys (which weren't in the right place). Now, when a file is renamed, the encryption keys will be copied first, and then the file will be renamed. If the encryption keys fail to be copied, the rename will fail. After the encryption keys are copied, the file could fail to be renamed. In this case, the copied keys will be removed, but the file will still be accessible because we still keep the old keys. The original keys (not the copy) will be removed if the file is successfully renamed successfully. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40433[#40433]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With encryption enabled when a file was renamed, first the actual file was renamed, and then the encryption keys were moved to the new location. If something went wrong, it was possible that the keys weren't moved. This caused the file to become inaccessible because we couldn't decrypt the file due to the missing keys (which weren't in the right place). Now, when a file is renamed, the encryption keys will be copied first, and then the file will be renamed. If the encryption keys fail to be copied, the rename will fail. After the encryption keys are copied, the file could fail to be renamed. In this case, the copied keys will be removed, but the file will still be accessible because we still keep the old keys. The original keys (not the copy) will be removed if the file is successfully renamed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40433[#40433]
```

=== Delete action is removed from sharing sections

In the files apps, the "shared with others" and "shared by link" sections allowed people to use a delete action on a file or folder present in that list. This was causing problems because people accidentally removed the folder when, in fact, they wanted to unshare it. This delete action isn't present any longer. You can unshare from those views by accessing the file or folder's details. If you want to delete the file or folder, you can do it from the regular "all files" section. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40497[#40497]

=== Allow to temporarily ignore invalid federated shares

> This change is targeted mostly at tightly federated setups. Currently, if a federated share is invalid or the API endpoint returns not found, an availability check would validate whether this is a problem with a server, and that given share is removed. However, in some cases these checks might not be enough (e.g. complex migrations in tightly federated setups). In that case the invalidation behaviour can be disabled by using the app setting: "occ config:app:set files_sharing enable_cleanup_invalid_external_shares --value no". https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40503[#40503]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change is targeted mostly at tightly federated setups. Currently, if a federated share is invalid or the API endpoint returns not found, an availability check would validate whether this is a problem with a server, and that given share is removed. However, in some cases these checks might not be enough (e.g. complex migrations in tightly federated setups). In that case the invalidation behavior can be disabled by using the app setting: "occ config:app:set files_sharing enable_cleanup_invalid_external_shares --value no". https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40503[#40503]
```

=== Fix orientation of images with exif data

> Some images with a large exif data had problems with the orientation when they were shown. This was caused by the native function failing to retrieve the exif data. Images with small exif data didn't have this problem. By making the chunk size of the stream bigger, the native function is now able to load the exif data properly and return the information, and with such information we can fix the orientation of the image. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40600[#40600]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some images with large exif data had problems with the orientation when they were shown. This was caused by the native function failing to retrieve the exif data. Images with small exif data didn't have this problem. By making the chunk size of the stream bigger, the native function is now able to load the exif data properly and return the information, and with such information we can fix the orientation of the image. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40600[#40600]
```

=== Remove empty directories from the files_versions

Empty directories were left when the contained versions were deleted or moved. Large installations might end up with too many of these empty directories. Now, when a version is deleted, the containing directory will also be deleted if there aren't any more versions inside. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40499[#40499]

=== Use correct themed l10n app folder when app lives outside of server root

> When an app_path is pointing outside of the ownCloud server root or uses an symlink under certain conditions the l10n folder points to an invalid location and results in a crash of the server. This happened due to the assumption that app paths always start with the server root path. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40607[#40607]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an app_path is pointing outside of the ownCloud server root or uses an symlink, under certain conditions the l10n folder points to an invalid location and results in a crash of the server. This happened due to the assumption that app paths always start with the server root path. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40607[#40607]
```

=== Fix share-into-share move scenario

> Public links were lost upon moving share into another share as the share owner was not correctly set. This has been now partially fixed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40612[#40612]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public links were lost upon moving a share into another share as the share owner was not correctly set. This has now been partially fixed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40612[#40612]
```

> === Prevent creation of empty files/folders when no available quota

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Prevent creation of empty files/folders when no quota is available
```

> Until now it was possible for users having 0 quota or who already reached the limit of their assigned quota to still create empty files/folders, which generated confusion. The PR fixes this behaviour. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40567[#40567]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until now it was possible for users with 0 quota or who already reached the limit of their assigned quota to still create empty files/folders, which generated confusion. This behavior has been fixed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40567[#40567]
```

> === Drag & Drop folders into public file upload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Drag & drop folders into public file upload
```

Previously only files were accepted via drag & drop. Users can now also drag folders into a public link that has the filedrop flag. When adding a folder, the hierarchy is flattened out and all files are added without any subfolders. Name collisons are avoided as usual. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40643[#40643]

=== Notable Changes

* The suggested host name and port syntax for the database host on the installation has been corrected. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40348[#40348]

> * Without this change, server-side Apache Auth (e.g. Shibboleth) resulted in redirect to default owncloud page, instead of last visited page. We now correctly handle redirect_url. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40470[#40470] https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40161[#40161]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Without this change, server-side Apache Auth (e.g. Shibboleth) resulted in a redirect to the default ownCloud page instead of the last visited page. We now correctly handle redirect_url. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40470[#40470] https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40161[#40161]
```

> * Before this change, objectstorages were reporting only infinite storage space. This could have caused problems in other apps that rely on this storage method, e.g. metrics app that monitors available space. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40192[#40192]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Before this change, objectstorages were reporting only infinite storage space. This could have caused problems in other apps that rely on this storage method, e.g. metrics app that monitors available space. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40389[#40389]
```

> * We now expect a not found error instead of permission denied error for some trash interactions. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40406[#40406]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We now expect a not found error instead of a permission denied error for some trash interactions. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40406[#40406]
```

> * Mime type of hidden files are now properly detected. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40427[#40427]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Mime types of hidden files are now properly detected. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40427[#40427]
```

* Unused Google SDK services are removed to reduce package size. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40444[#40444]
* Added account creation time in the oc_accounts table so that this info can be displayed over the Users page. Also extended the users provisioning API and the "user:list" occ command to display this info. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40588[#40588]

> * For easy access of files through WebDAV the url is now displayed right under the app password section. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40509[#40509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For easy access of files through WebDAV the URL is now displayed right under the app password section. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40509[#40509]
```

* The username as well as the full name of a user is now shown on his personal general settings page. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40510[#40510]

> * Changed the RewriteCond rules in the .htaccess file to match the expected paths. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40584[#40584]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The RewriteCond rules in the .htaccess file have been changed to match the expected paths. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40584[#40584]
```

* Two factor authentication can now be enabled using the provisioning API. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40617[#40617]

> * Detecting unused thumbnails is now using a better optimized SQL statements which consumes less database and web server resources. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40514[#40514]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Detecting unused thumbnails is now using a better optimized SQL statement which consumes less database and web server resources. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40514[#40514]
```

* xref:changes-in-8-0[Changes in 8.0]
* xref:changes-in-7-0[Changes in 7.0]

== Changes in 10.12.0

> Dear ownCloud administrator, find below the changes and known issues in ownCloud Server 10.12 that need your attention. You can also read {oc-changelog-url}[the full ownCloud Server changelog] for further details on what has changed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dear ownCloud administrator, find below the changes and known issues in ownCloud Server 10.12 that need your attention. You can also read the {oc-changelog-url}[full ownCloud Server changelog] for further details on what has changed.
```

=== Migrations

When upgrading from ownCloud Server 10.11.0, the following migrations will run as part of the upgrade procedure:

> * A migration step takes care of setting the length of the "oc_calendars.components" column to 255 (see below). This step is expected to be quick and should not impact upgrade duration significantly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40563 [#40563]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A migration step takes care of setting the length of the "oc_calendars.components" column to 255 (see below). This step is expected to be quick and should not impact upgrade duration significantly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40563[#40563]
```

=== Drop PHP 7.3 support across the platform

> Support for security fixes for PHP 7.3 ended in December 2021. ownCloud core no longer supports PHP 7.3 therefore ensure that you are using PHP 7.4. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40394[#40394]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Support for security fixes for PHP 7.3 ended in December 2021. ownCloud Server no longer supports PHP 7.3 therefore ensure that you are using PHP 7.4. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40394[#40394]

NOTE: Before upgrading to ownCloud Server 10.12, you MUST upgrade to PHP 7.3. ownCloud Server 10.12 will not start when using PHP 7.3.
```
This makes this change prominent visible.

=== Delete action is removed from sharing sections

In the files apps, the "shared with others" and "shared by link" sections allowed people to use a delete action on a file or folder present in that list. This was causing problems because people accidentally removed the folder when, in fact, they wanted to unshare it. This delete action isn't present any longer. You can unshare from those views by accessing the file or folder's details. If you want to delete the file or folder, you can do it from the regular "all files" section. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40497[#40497]

=== Allow to temporarily ignore invalid federated shares

> This change is targeted mostly at tightly federated setups. Currently, if federated share is invalid or api endpoint returns not found, availability check would validate whether this is a problem with a server and if checks complete that given share is removed. However, in some cases these checks might not be enough (e.g. complex migrations in tightly federated setups), and in that case invalidation behaviour can be disabled using below app setting: "occ config:app:set files_sharing enable_cleanup_invalid_external_shares --value no". https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40503[#40503]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This change is targeted mostly at tightly federated setups. Currently, if a federated share is invalid or the API endpoint returns not found, an availability check would validate whether this is a problem with a server, and that given share is removed. However, in some cases these checks might not be enough (e.g. complex migrations in tightly federated setups). In that case the invalidation behaviour can be disabled by using the app setting: "occ config:app:set files_sharing enable_cleanup_invalid_external_shares --value no". https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40503[#40503]
```

* xref:changes-in-8-0[Changes in 8.0]
* xref:changes-in-7-0[Changes in 7.0]

== Changes in 10.12.0

Dear ownCloud administrator, find below the changes and known issues in ownCloud Server 10.12 that need your attention. You can also read the {oc-changelog-url}[full ownCloud Server changelog] for further details on what has changed.

=== Migrations

When upgrading from ownCloud Server 10.11.0, the following migrations will run as part of the upgrade procedure:

* A migration step takes care of setting the length of the "oc_calendars.components" column to 255 (see below). This step is expected to be quick and should not impact upgrade duration significantly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40563[#40563]

=== Drop PHP 7.3 support across the platform

Support for security fixes for PHP 7.3 ended in December 2021. ownCloud Server no longer supports PHP 7.3 therefore ensure that you are using PHP 7.4. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40394[#40394]

> NOTE: Before upgrading to ownCloud Server 10.12, you MUST upgrade to PHP 7.3. ownCloud Server 10.12 will not start when using PHP 7.3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: Before upgrading to ownCloud Server 10.12, you MUST upgrade to PHP 7.4. ownCloud Server 10.12 will not start when using PHP 7.3.
```

When upgrading from ownCloud Server 10.11.0, the following migrations will run as part of the upgrade procedure:

* A migration step takes care of setting the length of the "oc_calendars.components" column to 255 (see below). This step is expected to be quick and should not impact upgrade duration significantly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40563[#40563]

> * An index is going to be added on the oc_filecache table which should help to speed-up bulk file operations. Plase be aware that this migration step may take several hours in case of installations where the oc_filecache table contains a significant large amount of entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40633[#40633]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* An index is going to be added on the oc_filecache table which should help to speed-up bulk file operations. Please be aware that this migration step may take several hours in case of installations where the oc_filecache table contains a significantly large number of entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40633[#40633]
```

Author: thanks for noticing it
